---
title: Package vignettes
subtitle: How to build package vignettes with knitr
date: '2012-01-22'
slug: vignette
---

Since R 3.0.0, non-Sweave vignettes are officially supported. Please see the
section "Non-Sweave vignettes" in the manual "[Writing R
Extensions](http://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-devel/R-exts.html#Non_002dSweave-vignettes)".
Basically what you need to do for package vignettes are:

1. Add `%\VignetteEngine{knitr::knitr}` and `%\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}` to the vignette source document. Also specify the vignette index entry with `%\VignetteIndexEntry{}`.
1. Specify `VignetteBuilder: knitr` in the package `DESCRIPTION` file.
1. Add `Suggests: knitr` in `DESCRIPTION` if **knitr** is needed _only_ for vignettes. If your vignette is R Markdown, you also need `rmarkdown` in `Suggests`.

## Vignette engines

Then all your vignettes will be compiled by **knitr** instead of the
default engine Sweave. The vignette engine `knitr::knitr` is only one of
possible engines in **knitr**. To see all of them, run

```r 
library(knitr)
library(tools)
names(vignetteEngine(package = 'knitr'))
# for example:
# "knitr::rmarkdown" "knitr::knitr" "knitr::docco_classic" "knitr::docco_linear"
# "knitr::knitr_notangle" ...
```

The engines with the suffix `_notangle` have the same weave functions as those
without the suffix, but have disabled the tangle function, meaning that there
will not be R scripts generated from vignettes during `R CMD build` or `R CMD
check`. See [here](http://bit.ly/SnLi6h) for a discussion on why sometimes we
may not want to tangle R scripts from vignettes (basically it is redundant for R
CMD check to run the same code again after the code has been executed in weave,
and currently the inline R code expressions are not included in the tangle
output, which can cause problems).

## Examples

All the document formats that **knitr** supports can be used for package
vignettes (e.g. [R
Markdown](http://rmarkdown.rstudio.com)). I have
[some examples](https://github.com/yihui/knitr/blob/master/vignettes/) in
the **knitr** package, and [many other
packages](https://gist.github.com/yihui/7698648) on CRAN also contain
**knitr** vignettes.

## Command-line usage

Since R 3.1.0, any document that has specified the vignette engine via
`%\VignetteEngine{}` can be compiled through the command line `R CMD Sweave`.
This is not restricted to Sweave documents or R package vignettes.

## A note to devtools users

Note **devtools** does not build vignettes by default when you
`devtools::install()` (same thing for some `install_*` functions like
`install_github()`) a package from a directory. You have to specify the argument
`build_vignettes = TRUE` when you install the package. Currently there is no way
to build vignettes using **devtools** if you just use the RStudio button `Build &
Reload`. You have to `Build Source Package`, and run `R CMD INSTALL` on the
tarball. Or run `devtools::install(build_vignettes = TRUE)` in the R console.

## Acknowledgement

I really appreciate the generous support by one of the R core members Duncan
Murdoch as well as the hard work by Henrik Bengtsson.
