---
title: Random Thoughts (Episode 1)
date: '2021-03-31'
slug: random-1
---

As an attempt to close the 300 tabs in my browser, I'm starting this series of
blog posts to write down some random thoughts. Some of them are from the tweets
that caught my attention, and some are from Github issues or random articles,
etc. Each item may be worth a separate blog post, but I cannot possibly afford
the time to write so many posts. However, I'm not sure if there will ever be an
Episode 2, because these random thoughts include some unpopular opinions and
open questions on my mind, to which I have no answers. I may have to just give
up writing this type of post to avoid creating even more noise to this noisy
enough world. To minimize the spread of my noise, I will hold the actual content
of this post for at least 90 days before publishing it. I also wish that readers
do not share this post. Thanks!

<!--# ON_HOLD -->

1.  I hate starting with this one, but I sigh a sigh upon seeing the cost of
    pursuing things that "look good visually," such as [the arrow in Fira
    Code](https://twitter.com/grant_mcdermott/status/1395408484796039179).
    Ligatures are both clever and beautiful in Fira Code, but you get asked
    every single time by someone in the audience "how did you input that arrow
    or triangle?" Then you clarify that it was not a real arrow or triangle but
    actually two characters cleverly joined. The audience thought it was cool
    nonetheless, just like the past you. Once this person has been successfully
    "infected," and gives a presentation the next time, there will be another
    person in the audience asking the same question, and the infection goes on
    and on...

    Does `<-` look so much worse than ←? Or `|>` worse than ▷?

    Well, do I use Fira Code? I actually do. I'm one of the infected. Will I
    miss it if it were gone or not invented in the first place? No, I will not.
    Perhaps we could be better off if it were not invented...

2.  Not surprisingly, the above tweet [brought
    up](https://twitter.com/grant_mcdermott/status/1395498997352067074) one of
    the [most](https://twitter.com/drob/status/1007460883306635264)
    [controversial](https://twitter.com/CJWattenburger/status/1357391190660952064)
    topics about R on Twitter---the assignment operator `<-` vs `=`. Grant has
    linked to [a Github
    reply](https://github.com/Robinlovelace/geocompr/issues/319#issuecomment-427376764)
    that I wrote in 2018 and a blog post by [Matthew
    Martin](https://www.separatinghyperplanes.com/2018/02/why-you-should-use-and-never.html "author profile")
    (for the record, John Mount has also written [a great
    post](https://win-vector.com/2016/12/12/the-case-for-using-in-r/) on this
    topic in 2016). This topic always reminds me of [a
    mistake](https://stat.ethz.ch/pipermail/r-devel/2011-December/062786.html)
    that John C Nash made in 2011 (`fun(arg <- value)` by accident), and [a more
    recent one](https://twitter.com/rdpeng/status/1155136987264880640/photo/1)
    Roger Peng made in 2019 (typing `i < -2` when he meant `i <- 2`). Although I
    have my own strong opinion, I often refrain from debating on it or
    recommending other people to use `=` (I have even provided an option in
    `formatR::tidy_source()` for users to automatically substitute `=` with
    `<-`.), because I'd be more worried if I win, which will only make the whole
    situation even more miserable. People who use `<-`
    [know](https://twitter.com/drob/status/1357402894383910912) there is no
    compelling technical reason to use it, and I just wish they do not push us
    too hard. I promise I will be as quiet as possible.

    This is perhaps another example of something that looks so good visually
    that its appearance makes its cost negligible.

3.  A hex logo seems to be mandatory now when developing an R package, because
    everyone is making a hex sticker. I started to doubt if this trend was a
    good thing overall, because not all package authors have the graphic design
    talent or could afford (the time and cost of) hiring a designer or
    purchasing hex stickers. Well, Nan Xiao has at least provided [a simple
    solution](https://nanx.me/blog/post/rebranding-r-packages-with-hexagon-stickers/)
    to generate a minimalist hex logo, which can be helpful.

4.  I do not understand why [people need to be
    embarrassed](https://twitter.com/DaphnaHarel/status/1392163729119358981) for
    not being good at programming with the Tidyverse but good at base R. Do I
    feel bad for [primarily using base R](/en/2017/10/base-r-broman/)? No. The
    vast majority of my programming code is written with base R. I admit base R
    has its quirks, but I'm reasonably familiar with them. As I mentioned [in
    this post](/en/2017/10/base-r-broman/), I have only a single complaint about
    base R, which is the partial matching by name of list elements. That said, I
    do not mean to recommend everyone to use base R. On the contrary, I'd still
    warn newcomers if they want to start with base R, but there is nothing
    embarrassing about being a master of base R.

5.  I have seen people tripped over base R's concept of "vectors" several times,
    e.g., when they use `is.vector()`, what they actually need is often
    `is.atomic()` instead. If you realize that [a list is a generic
    vector](https://twitter.com/martyn_plummer/status/1384879386076360708), you
    would probably not be too surprised by the behaviors of functions that
    operate on vectors. As a Chinese, I find the English phrase "make sense"
    interesting, because I have rarely consciously thought that "sense" needs to
    be "made" instead of being self-explanatory, although in reality, a lot of
    sense has to be "made."

6.  Some quirks in base R are surprising or annoying, but I do not think R core
    wants to trip you over deliberately. Their hands are much more tightly tied
    than package authors and users, and they have to be more conservative.
    Stability is a valid choice. When they want to correct mistakes (especially
    design mistakes), it will often take a long time. We should acknowledge that
    they have been trying to do so over the years. For example, the infamous
    `stringsAsFactors = TRUE` was finally changed to `FALSE` in R 4.0.0.
    Similarly, they are aware of [the `&&` operator's
    issue](https://twitter.com/henrikbengtsson/status/1395173428588687360)
    (i.e., it should not have operated on vectors of length greater than one),
    and have started to fix it since 2017. It is not a trivial change, and
    [cannot happen
    overnight](https://developer.r-project.org/Blog/public/2018/10/12/conditions-of-length-greater-than-one/index.html).

7.  Why does [the typo `lenght()` occur
    frequently](https://twitter.com/cantabile/status/1363830393275699206)? My
    explanation is that it is faster to type `h` than `t` because `h` requires
    your right index finger to move horizontally by one key (from `j`), whereas
    `t` requires your left index finger to move diagonally to the up-right (from
    `f`), which means the distance is `sqrt(2)` keys.

8.  I wished to [make a change in
    **knitr**](https://github.com/yihui/knitr/issues/1864), which will require
    the authors of packages that depend on **knitr** to make a relatively simple
    change accordingly. Originally I felt there was no hurry and was hoping to
    give these authors a year or two to make the change in their packages, but
    due to an email from CRAN, I had to make this change sooner, so I started to
    throw errors in `R CMD build` for packages that have not made the change. I
    did not throw this error during `R CMD check` on CRAN, because I did not
    want these packages to be removed from CRAN just because of this simple
    change, otherwise I'd be very guilty. However, I did not consider the case
    of BioC, and soon [Hervé Pagès
    arrived](https://github.com/yihui/knitr/issues/1864#issuecomment-822848655),
    with smoke... Five days later, the smoke was gone, fortunately. I want to
    thank him and those authors who were affected by this issue for their
    patience and understanding. I wish you could trust me that I hate disturbing
    you with this type of issue, but sometimes things just go beyond my control,
    in which case I will try my best to make it up.

9.  When I have a scheduled meeting or phone call on a day, usually it will be
    hard for me to focus on anything important until the meeting/call is over.
    I'm certainly not alone (e.g.,
    [this](https://twitter.com/aneandes/status/1392811870680059911) and
    [this](https://twitter.com/ikashnitsky/status/1386994592755687429)). I'm all
    for on-demand meetings, but scheduled recurring meetings make me nervous
    from time to time, especially when I do not have an idea about what the
    meeting is going to cover or what I need to prepare.

10. I'm also nervous about Slack direct messages. I liked Slack for a while when
    it first came out a few years ago, but found it too distracting to me later,
    so I disliked it (just [like
    Hilary](https://twitter.com/hspter/status/1346489750086012928)). Emails have
    been overwhelming enough to me. Slack messages are like an email split into
    small pieces and shooting out randomly. I'm nervous because I feel as if the
    other person were waiting on the other end for me to reply immediately
    (which I know is unlikely to be true), and if I quit Slack without replying,
    I will forget to reply since there are so many messages. Once I kept Slack
    open for about a whole week because I was asked a question that I did not
    have time to answer. Of course, [simply saying
    "Hi"](https://twitter.com/geoffjentry/status/1388128826765553668) without
    any other messages following up can make everyone nervous.

    Tools have made it faster and more convenient to communicate (e.g.,
    instant/direct messages), but our brain's capacity to deal with the growing
    number of messages has not increased substantially at the same time. I
    wonder if we'd actually benefit from some hurdle in tools for communication.
    No one would write a letter to a friend with a single word "Hi" on paper and
    mail it out with a stamp.

11. An educator received an email titled "F\* you" from a student and mentioned
    it on Twitter. For some reason, the tweet was deleted later ([replies still
    exist](https://twitter.com/moore3ac/status/1395037080892366855)). I do not
    understand why she chose Twitter as an outlet for such a complicated matter.
    In my opinion, for anything that is potentially controversial, if you post
    it on social media, everyone will lose, and the only winner will be the
    social media platform. I'm not blaming the OP at all. I just want to
    understand why and wonder if there could be a better solution.

12. I have mixed feelings about memes now. I do not know how I should take
    them---should I treat them as pure fun of the OP? I find it disturbing when
    a meme is about demeaning, e.g., "[How to master R; Haha good luck;
    crying](https://twitter.com/ecologyofgavin/status/1364995069002932227)."
    Perhaps it was not meant to be demeaning. Tweets are often too terse, and I
    do not know how to interpret them.

13. I envied Karthik when [he
    said](https://twitter.com/_inundata/status/1343733516798840833) there was
    almost no FOMO in 2020. I was able to get rid of the FOMO in previous years
    (which was not easy), but it struck me heavily again in late 2020, and I
    could not stop checking Twitter multiple times every day, because my sense
    of security was destroyed, and I could no longer afford reading Twitter only
    once a week.

14. Sometimes I feel conclusions are drawn too quickly on Twitter, but it is
    hard to question them in the environment of social media, where it seems
    that people have to be either friends or enemies. [For
    example](https://twitter.com/mallory_yu/status/1346196380281405445), what if
    the software engineer really does not know that there exist last names with
    fewer than 3 characters? Would ignorance mean malice? It was a fault, and
    needed to be corrected (and was corrected soon with an apology), but could
    there have been a better way to resolve this issue? What if she contacted
    the company in private and confirmed the malice before blaming them on
    social media? When an individual is confronting a company, the individual
    may be on the weaker side, but when a company is confronting the social
    media, the company may be on the weaker side.

15. [Why is the internet such a brutal
    place](https://twitter.com/djnavarro/status/1361506234474487813)? I'm very
    sorry for you.

16. This bullet took me quite a bit of courage to write, and I had to hesitate
    for months. Finally I decided to write it in an HTML comment. Please do me a
    favor not to spread it. Someday I will try to say it more openly, but not
    now, because now I have too many perplexities and doubt if I have enough
    sanity.

    <!--# Sometimes I feel the comparison between Tidyverse with base R is not done fairly, such as https://twitter.com/drob/status/1341841693990150147 and https://twitter.com/andrewheiss/status/1359583543509348356. For @drob's tweet, I think the comparison would have been much fairer, had it used base R's expand.grid() instead of the obviously awkward nested loops. In this particular case, I do not see an obvious advantage of tidyr's crossing() over base R's expand.grid(). For @andrewheiss's slide on convincing people of using the pipe, a fairer comparison IMHO would be something like this: 

    me <- wake_up(me, time = "8:00")
    me <- get_out_of_bed(me, side = "correct")
    me <- get_dressed(me, pants = TRUE, shirt = TRUE)
    me <- leave_house(me, car = TRUE, bike = FALSE)

    Does that look horrible? For sure, it does not look as elegant as the pipe code, but is not that bad, either. I use this coding style myself all the time. It is a dumb style, but also super easy to develop and debug, since I can easily examine the result of any intermediate step.

    Both cases feel like attacking a straw man and exaggerating the merits of Tidyverse and the pipe.

    If you have comments on this, please feel free to email me in private. Again, please do not spread it on Twitter. Thanks!
    -->

17. I feel the joke "for compatibility with S" has gone too far at times
    (especially on Twitter). It would be nicer if we could confirm with R core
    that a certain (mis)feature is really for compatibility with S before
    mocking at this reason, otherwise this possibly made-up reason may
    discourage newcomers from suggesting changes to R core. I think the
    `stringsAsFactors` example above has given us some hope that some improper
    features or design ideas could be changed or abandoned. Personally I do not
    believe that "compatibility with S" would be the sole reason that a certain
    peculiarity of base R has not been removed. How about thinking a little more
    of [Chesterton's
    fence](https://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Chesterton%27s_Fence)? If a fence is
    apparently useless or silly, perhaps the right thing to do next is to ask
    why, instead of deciding to take it down right away.

    That said, I admit that sometimes I cannot hold the urge to take down this
    type of fence myself.

18. BTW, speaking of R core, I really appreciate Martin Mächler's openness and
    responsiveness. He has been so nice and patient over so many years. It is
    not easy. I truly respect him.

19. Then should I talk about CRAN? My mixed feelings tell me
    no.<!--# Another sad example: https://thierrymoudiki.github.io/blog/2020/10/16/r/esgtoolkit-new-cran -->
    Okay. But... how about the new URL checking policy enforced since the end of
    2020? I can never understand why a redirected URL (not to mention dead URLs)
    inside a package's documentation can make the whole package unacceptable to
    CRAN. This is too stern.

    I believe the intention was good. They want to make sure all URLs are
    actually accessible. I love the idea of automatically checking the validity
    of URLs, and I appreciate the NOTEs. I absolutely do. I just do not
    understand why a problematic (should 301 redirect really be considered
    problematic?) URL can fail a submission, which may contain hours, days, or
    even months of work. It hurts.

    I'm not sure if CRAN expected [this
    consequence](https://twitter.com/sckottie/status/1346535467290746880): since
    the policy is so stern, package authors would rather remove all URLs from
    the package to dodge the check. I have removed certain URLs myself, and
    hidden README files, and even package vignettes from the source package
    because of the "problematic" URLs, which I believe are valid. If the goal of
    CRAN's policy maker was to improve the quality of package documentation, the
    actual effect could be the opposite---package authors have to remove working
    URLs (such as 301 redirects), and hide more documentation from the package.
    Is this an example of [perverse
    incentive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perverse_incentive)?

20. I have been surprised for a few times when people say `for`-loops are too
    slow ([example](https://github.com/rstudio/rmarkdown/pull/1707)) or too
    verbose ([example](https://stackoverflow.com/q/63008995/559676)), so you
    should always use `lapply()` or **purrr** instead. I have also heard people
    say that `for`-loops should absolutely not be taught to beginners. I'm not
    convinced that `for`-loops are *that* bad or advanced. Vectorization in R is
    great, but it does not mean `for`-loops need to be banned, or only advanced
    users can write `for`-loops. I agree that if you teach people the `for`-loop
    hammer, they may tend to hit every nail with this hammer (just because it is
    easy to understand and works universally). Is that the fault of `for`-loops,
    or just because it takes time and effort to learn other specialized
    (vectorized) hammers?

    I did a quick Google search to see why people think `for`-loops are bad and
    found [this one](https://www.finex.co/to-loop-or-not-to-loop/). A better
    hammer would be indexing by `[]` instead of using `for`-loops. The thing
    that bit the author was actually the unnecessary `gsub()`
    (`stringr::str_replace_all()` was also an overkill). I'd just use `[]`:

    ``` r
    # if the data only contains codes R/C/M/W/1/2/3/4
    recode_data = function(x) {
      y = c(
        'R' = 'Residential', 'C' = 'Commercial', 'M' = 'Multi-Family',
        'W' = '', '1' = '', '2' = '', '3' = '', '4' = ''
      )
      y[x]  # use the original data to index y
    }

    # slightly more complicated if the data also contains other codes
    recode_data = function(x) {
      y = c('R' = 'Residential', 'C' = 'Commercial', 'M' = 'Multi-Family')
      z = y[x]
      z[x %in% c('W', 1:4)] = ''
      i = is.na(z)  # preserve the additional codes
      z[i] = x[i]
      z
    }
    ```

    I have also heard people say that the indexing methods in base R (e.g., `[]`
    , `[[]]`, and `$`) should never be taught (at least to beginners). I do not
    know if that makes sense, but I think looking up elements in a table (e.g.,
    a vector) is a fundamental and important skill. I do not feel `[]` is *that*
    bad or complicated. Perhaps it is just me.

21. I learned a service named [Typefully](https://typefully.app), which helps
    you convert an article into a Twitter thread. I feel sad that such services
    exist. Since when we find reading a full article so unbearable that we can
    only chew at most 280 characters at a time?

22. We may well be used to this miserably polarized world in which people
    constantly and even stubbornly choose sides, but I was still quite surprised
    to come across this paper "[Breiman's two cultures: You don't have to choose
    sides](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.12219)." The very first sentence in the
    abstract shocked me:

    > Breiman's classic paper casts data analysis as a choice between two
    > cultures: data modelers and algorithmic modelers.

    I'm not sure if I understand the word "cast" (shape?), but I do not remember
    Breiman saying that data analysts have to "choose sides." [Thomas's
    reply](https://twitter.com/tslumley/status/1387131226780180480) confirmed my
    impression. Then I had no idea about why the authors implied that Breiman
    seemed to be promoting the dichotomy. Perhaps I misunderstood the authors,
    or the authors misunderstood Breiman, or it was just a matter of improper
    wording. BTW, thanks to Thomas, it was the first time that I had learned
    about [The Two Cultures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Two_Cultures),
    which seemed to be very interesting to me.

23. A few years ago I learned that `#daddad` happened to be a valid hex code for
    color and remembered it. This year [I used it for the first
    time](https://twitter.com/xieyihui/status/1370465751245656074) when Sharla
    asked how to show a color when typing a hex code. It seems that my solution
    was not what she was looking for, but here it is anyway:

    ``` html
    <input onkeyup="document.getElementById('circle').style.background=this.value;"/>
    <span id="circle" style="display:inline-block;border-radius:50%;width:1em;height:1em;"></span>
    ```

    <input onkeyup="document.getElementById('circle').style.background=this.value;" value="#daddad" />
    <span id="circle" style="display:inline-block;border-radius:50%;width:1.5em;height:1.5em;background:#daddad;"></span>

24. I tend to agree with Colin that [most people do not
    care](https://twitter.com/csgillespie/status/1363231481297002500) if things
    on the Internet are real or fake. The reinforcement of views takes place all
    the time. I'm not blaming people whose false views are reinforced, but
    blaming the technology. Our brain simply cannot handle so much information,
    and we are left little room to verify if anything is real or fake. The
    verification is too darn hard, even if it is a quick Google search---typing
    is too hard, compared to scrolling down to browse the next hot tweet.

25. I feel very sorry for you about [the
    benchmark](https://twitter.com/MattDowle/status/1360073970498875394). This
    is a complicated matter, and unfortunately I do not fully understand how it
    happened. Once again, I doubt if I have the sanity to comment on it.
    Benchmarks can hurt people easily, unless people seriously consider
    [Maximilian Kähler's
    reply](https://twitter.com/kaehler_max/status/1360198723071000576), i.e.,
    you may be comparing your own best performance against other people's
    non-optimal performance. How many benchmark authors would ask for feedback
    from their competitors before releasing the benchmarks into the public?
    Perhaps few.

    On a related note, [Rob Tibshirani made an honest
    recommendation](https://twitter.com/ByranSmucker/status/1024684578441551873)
    at JSM 2018:

    > If someone shows you simulations that only show the superiority of their
    > method, you should be suspicious. A good set of simulations will show
    > where the method shines but also where it breaks.

26. I have had [the same experiences as
    Miles](https://twitter.com/MilesMcBain/status/1356556079312736257). I know
    people will ask "what's the package?" Unfortunately, I cannot tell. It would
    be too expensive to reveal.

27. The year 2020 was extremely traumatic to me. Some things fell apart, and
    some almost did. My anxiety level was higher than ever. I felt touched upon
    seeing [Amelia's
    tweet](https://twitter.com/AmeliaMN/status/1359924462909607937). It was one
    of the warmest moments to me. Thanks, Amelia!

    Similarly, [thanks,
    Miles](https://twitter.com/MilesMcBain/status/1299203355802173440)!

28. One thing I really dislike about Twitter is its branching process in the
    replies, especially when we talk about anything serious (why discussing
    anything serious on Twitter is another question). Sometimes I even wonder if
    this branching process contributes (a lot) to today's polarization of
    opinions. By "branching," I mean replying to replies. This is nothing new,
    and has long existed in web forums and commenting systems. Twitter's problem
    is that it collapses replies, so you cannot see all replies
    effortlessly---you have to keep clicking on certain replies or "Show
    replies" in all branches of conversations under the same tweet, as if
    Twitter deliberately wanted to hide the full picture from readers so people
    could bark endlessly on their own separate branches, without seeing other
    branches.

    Disqus users may remember the community's outrage when Disqus rolled out and
    forced the awful new feature of ["collapsed replies" in March
    2019](https://blog.disqus.com/introducing-collapsed-replies). The feature
    was finally disabled [four months
    later](https://blog.disqus.com/update-on-collapsed-replies) due to the
    fierce pushback. The rationale of the new feature was:

    > Through this testing, we found that by collapsing long sub-threads of
    > replies, more overall readers choose participate in discussions. Because
    > the collapsed experience exposes more unique viewpoints (more top-level
    > comments), there are more opportunities for readers to both leave their
    > own top-level comments and reply to several different opinions from
    > others.

    I'm not sure if it is fair to summarize it as a single word: engagement
    (their testing found that collapsing replies increased engagement). When
    engagement is the goal, it could be very dangerous (it is fine to be a
    by-product of, say, quality). The article "[How Facebook got addicted to
    spreading
    misinformation](https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/03/11/1020600/facebook-responsible-ai-misinformation/)"
    mentioned that "models that maximize engagement increase polarization." In
    terms of engagement, perhaps Facebook's weapon is to spread misinformation,
    and Twitter's weapon is to force short text for no technical reason (to make
    it hard to articulate things on this platform when necessary---articulation
    often requires length) and let people branch out infitnitely under a thread
    (so it is harder to see what other branches are talking about). Perhaps I
    have assumed too much malice of these platforms. Anyway, I was glad that
    Disqus reverted this awful feature.

    Lastly, let me give a recent example to show the problem of this branching
    process, with my apologies to Jeroen in advance (you are still [one of my
    favorite hackers](/en/2018/03/hacking-rd/)). This example is meant to show a
    common problem of *the Twitter platform*, instead of *Twitter users*.
    Basically, [Jeroen
    asked](https://twitter.com/opencpu/status/1377221618242441219) if there was
    a way to configure tinytex to automatically install missing packages. I did
    not see the tweet until 19 hours later. By that time, four people had
    reacted on three branches like "Wait a second... Isn't that what tinytex
    already does?" Only one of the branches revealed the actual question he was
    asking. After I understood it, the paranoid me also explained it to people
    on other branches. Since the question was hard to answer on Twitter, I asked
    Jeroen to file a Github issue, [which he
    did](https://github.com/rstudio/tinytex/issues/292). If there were other
    people who replied with surprise in the Github issue, their surprise and
    confusion could be cleared with a single reply.

    That was just a normal example of asking a technical question on Twitter.
    There was nothing controversial or emotional. I cannot imagine how I could
    possible participate in discussions on social media that involve opinions. I
    cannot image the chaos. There was once a time when people would write
    "letters to editor" to express opinions or debate on controversial topics.
    Now every controversial topic could attract millions of "(re)tweets to OP."
    My brain is too small to deal with them. I'm at a loss.

    It is quick and easy to send out a tweet. What is the price that we pay for
    this speed?

29. A couple of months ago, I learned about the goal of the like button on
    social media in the film "[The Social
    Dilemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Social_Dilemma)." To my surprise,
    the original goal was to show and feel love. I'd feel touched by this goal,
    had I learned about it ten years ago. In my opinion, the biggest design flaw
    of the like button, in addition to [other problems I wrote about in
    2018](/en/2018/11/terrible-medium/#claps), is that the number of likes is
    publicly shown. These numbers distort love, because I do not think love
    should ever be quantified or the quantities should be publicly displayed on
    social media. With numbers in our hands, we will inevitably start to sort
    and compare, no matter if they are comparable, which leads to all sorts of
    problems.

30. My daily intake of calories is fairly low. I rarely eat anything outside
    meals (such as snacks, candies, or ice creams), and primarily drink tap
    water. Normally I do not pay attention to the number of calories on food,
    but I suddenly noticed a few weeks ago that an ice cream box had labeled the
    total number of calories in addition to [calories per
    serving](https://www.fda.gov/food/new-nutrition-facts-label/how-understand-and-use-nutrition-facts-label#Calories).
    I was surprised because this had been something that I never understood in
    the US. Why and how did the producer determine the serving size for me? Why
    don't they tell me the total number but force me to do the multiplication?
    The spiteful me thought it was because the number per serving would often be
    much smaller than the total number. If the consumer were not careful enough
    to read the label, they might think it is the total number and comfortably
    consume the whole package. The total number of calories would look too
    scary.

31. In 2019, I wrote [a Github issue guide](/issue/) to remind users of common
    problems found in past Github issues, so it would be easier for me to help
    them. I felt the language might be too strong or unwelcome. I was sorry that
    I had to be a bad guy like this, but before August 2020 (when I finally
    managed to hire a new colleague), I had been dealing with most Github issues
    related to **rmarkdown** and **knitr** by myself. There had been thousands
    of them. It was hard for me to deal with the exhaustion due to writing the
    reminder of providing reproducible examples, or asking people to ask pure
    questions in other places, since I could not afford doing customer service
    in Github issues. I wish to help as much as I could, if only you let me help
    you more easily.

    I felt a little relieved when I saw [a Stack Overflow user
    said](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/63250597/#comment111850321_63250597):

    > It might not be a proper usage of GH issues, but Yihui tends to be
    > forgiving for this sort of thing.

32. I did not know what `here::here()` meant until I read its documentation a
    long time after I first heard of it. I saw people were extremely excited
    about it, but I found the term "here" confusing to me, because it is
    relative. If a path is relative, the key question to ask is, "relative to
    what?" It turns out that `here::here()` is relative to a project root. In
    other words, "here" means the project root. That is why I originally found
    it confusing, especially in the context of **knitr**/R Markdown documents,
    where "here" means the document file by default, i.e., I'm thinking "inside
    the document" instead of "from the project root." Partly because of that, I
    wrote a simple experimental function `xfun::from_root()`. I guess this
    function name is less confusing.

    I saw [people
    mentioned](https://twitter.com/djnavarro/status/1345224838982483969) that
    `here::here()` could help solve the problem of `setwd()`. It definitely
    could, but to me, using relative paths can also avoid the need for
    `setwd()`, which is a more natural solution in my eyes, and does not assume
    the existence of a project. [As I explained in the R Markdown
    Cookbook](https://bookdown.org/yihui/rmarkdown-cookbook/working-directory.html),
    there is not one single "correct" answer to the question "relative to what?"
    People just have different mental models as well as [strong
    opinions](/en/2018/01/limit-of-bureaucracy/) about relative paths.

    Inevitably, popular tools can be abused in certain cases, perhaps because
    people think they are just magic. [For
    example](https://stackoverflow.com/q/62595662/559676), I do not understand
    the point of passing an absolute path to `here::here()`.

33. I agree with [Ben
    Hamner](https://twitter.com/benhamner/status/1027093758624460800):

    > It's crazy how much our universities focus the next generation on test
    > results, course completions, and degrees. I wish they empowered students
    > to create and build. The transcript they should be aiming for is "here's
    > the ten best things we created during our time here"

    My own transcripts when I was a student often looked decent, but I did not
    feel particularly proud of them. Instead I did feel proud of things that I
    built and created.

34. Comparing [this
    tweet](https://twitter.com/sTeamTraen/status/1073161981962657792) with its
    author's comments under [this blog
    post](https://notstatschat.rbind.io/2018/12/17/what-are-packages-for/), once
    again I do not understand why people start discussions on Twitter. Twitter's
    arbitrary limit of characters is a perfect means to discourage clarity. All
    lose. Twitter wins.

35. Karl said "[I don't understand this talk at
    all.](https://twitter.com/kwbroman/status/1155897540597837824)" I was
    relieved to hear that. I thought I was the only dumb person at JSM.
    Seriously, there have been talks of which I could not understand a single
    sentence other than "good morning" in the beginning and "thank you" at the
    end. Perhaps they were too specialized to me, e.g., I know little about
    biology and pharma. Even the talks are about statistics, I could not
    understand, either (perhaps because of too much math). Sometimes I felt the
    speakers were too nervous or inexperienced in giving talks, so they just
    kept reading their slides out loud word by word (that is probably [what Max
    meant](https://twitter.com/topepos/status/1155937755760750592)).

36. There have been people who argue to death about Tidyverse vs base R. It
    always feels ironic to me that R is a programming language born for
    statistics and data analysis, but few people would respond to the debate
    with randomized controlled experiments and data. Most people tend to argue
    from their personal feelings. The paper "[A Randomized Controlled Trial on
    the Wild Wild West of Scientific Computing with Student
    Learners](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3291279.3339421)" was a rare
    exception, and did not conclude which was better in terms of task completion
    time (base, tidy, or tilde).

    That said, even with randomized experiments, I doubt if we could get a clear
    answer, because the question is too broad to answer from a few experiments.

37. [I wrote about it before](/en/2018/05/right-easier-than-wrong/), but I feel
    downvoting without explanation is still the worst problem of Stack Overflow.
    I really dislike people who downvote and run. It hurts (here is [one of the
    many
    examples](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/59141469/issue-with-animating-geom-bar-using-gganimate/59144126#comment104515493_59144126)).

38. I learned for [the first time](https://d.cosx.org/d/421162/17) on my 14
    years' R journey that we could `cut()` dates in base R (see `?cut.Date`).
    There are still too many things that I do not know in base R. This post "[R
    Base Gems](https://ihaddadenfodil.com/post/r-base-gems/)" is a good read.

39. I found it hard to believe that an Editor in Chief who seems to be
    influential (> 50K followers) [would publicly ask R users to switch to
    Python](https://twitter.com/mbeisen/status/1250285192654143489). That was
    going way too far, and almost equivalent to saying R users are simply insane
    and sanity only exists in Python. The next day [he
    apologized](https://twitter.com/mbeisen/status/1250488275640303616). I found
    two things interesting. One was that 475 people liked the offense (also
    retweeted and quoted 59 times), and by comparison, 86 people liked the
    apology (retweeted 5 times). Tell me why we should not delete Twitter like
    Facebook. The other thing was 8 months later, [the same person
    tweeted](https://twitter.com/mbeisen/status/1333857154055372800) (with 526
    likes):

    > is R really this hard to use? what am I doing wrong?

    To me, this would be a completely normal complaint about a language, had the
    previous offense not existed. Well, that is not a big deal. I'm fine with
    it. The big deal is, as I have mentioned several times before in this post,
    the terseness of tweets. "What am I doing wrong" is a great question, but no
    one would be able to answer this question in the tweet, unless you tell us
    exactly what you did. In other words, if we do not even know *what you did*,
    how can we possibly tell you *what you did wrong*? The terseness is great to
    set up people for [language wars](/en/2018/11/english-is-hard/) (one side
    would respond tersely "R is easy" and the other side would insist that "R is
    hard").

40. I was shocked by Jeremy Howard's post "[I violated a code of
    conduct](https://www.fast.ai/2020/10/28/code-of-conduct/)" last year. A few
    things that he mentioned in the post resonated with me. For example,
    unilateral conclusions and decisions suck:

    > I asked why they didn't take a statement from me before that finding, and
    > they said "we all watched the video, so we could see for ourselves the
    > violation".

    <!--# I experienced the same feeling last year in my own work. An important decision was made unilaterally. I had absolutely no idea about it until its implementation had started for quite a while, by which time it had become much harder (emotionally) for me to make my move. The decision was made due to a mistake of mine, but the mistake was not intentional. I had wished to fix it for long, too, but did not know how back then. Consequently, I had to fix the mistake later with an overwhelming psychological trauma, which had bitten me many times along the way, leading to my first ever mental breakdown. That was the first time I had learned the difference between a psychological trauma and a physical wound—the same trauma can hurt you for numerous times (every time you recall it), and a wound usually just heals with time once and for all. -->

    I also understand this feeling of his too well:

    > One the call, I was surprised to find myself facing four people. The
    > previous call had been with just one, and suddenly being so greatly
    > outnumbered made me feel very intimidated.
