---
title: Finding Function Calls in R Code
date: '2023-01-01'
slug: func-call
---

Yesterday I learned an unexpected but interesting use of the **highr** package
from [a Github issue](https://github.com/yihui/highr/issues/10). This package is
intended for syntax highlighting R code, but the user wanted to identify
function calls from given R code. What he did was to first syntax highlight the
code, and then look for LaTeX code `\kwd{}` in the result. I told him that this
task could be done with `getParseData()`, but there were a few edge cases. For
example:

``` r
getParseData(parse(text = c('lapply(1:10, paste)')))
```

       line1 col1 line2 col2 id parent                token   text
    1      1    1     1    6  1      3 SYMBOL_FUNCTION_CALL lapply
    2      1    7     1    7  2     20                  '('      (
    4      1    8     1    8  4      5            NUM_CONST      1
    6      1    9     1    9  6     10                  ':'      :
    7      1   10     1   11  7      8            NUM_CONST     10
    9      1   12     1   12  9     20                  ','      ,
    14     1   14     1   18 14     16               SYMBOL  paste
    15     1   19     1   19 15     20                  ')'      )

In this case, `lapply` was correctly identified as `SYMBOL_FUNCTION_CALL`, but
`paste` was not (instead, it was identified as a `SYMBOL`). We can try to
evaluate the symbol and check if it is a function:

``` r
find_funs = function(code) {
  d = getParseData(parse(text = code))
  f = d[d$token == 'SYMBOL_FUNCTION_CALL', 'text']
  for (s in d[d$token == 'SYMBOL', 'text']) {
    tryCatch({
      ev = eval(as.symbol(s), parent.frame())
      if (is.function(ev)) f = c(f, s)
    }, error = function(e) NULL)
  }
  f
}
```

Then `find_funs('lapply(1:10, paste)')` can find both `lapply` and `paste`.

One caveat is that this approach doesn't evaluate the code but simply parses it,
so it won't be able to recognize functions in add-on packages by default. One
way to address this problem is to detect `library()` or `require()` calls and
search for possible function names in packages. This won't be totally robust
(e.g., for the case `library(x, character.only = TRUE)`). Another way is to
actually evaluate the code before trying to detect if a symbol is a function,
which is more expensive.

Another edge case is function calls in `glue::glue()`, e.g., `str_to_title` and
`as.character` in the following case:

``` r
glue("This number is {str_to_title(as.character(123))}")
```

We can certainly detect `glue` calls and try to parse the glue templates. I'm
not interested in going that far, so I'll just stop here.

Besides `getParseData()`, I guess `codetools::makeCodeWalker()` might also work.
I first learned about it [from Kohske ten years
ago](https://github.com/yihui/formatR/commit/a2692d5).
